Handsome - The First Unofficial Police Dog of the Cincinnati Police Department


The Policeman's Pal

On a cold night in 1898, Cincinnati patrolman "Big Jim" O'Neill was making his rounds along the downtown waterfront when he found a whimpering, abandoned puppy in a doorway. He put it under his coat, brought it back to his station, and the pup was quickly adopted by the police in the second district.

They named the scruffy mutt "Handsome" and he was soon joining their daily patrols. It was a rough neighborhood of bars and rooming houses, known as "rat row," but Handsome was ready for the challenge. Over the course of his life he assisted in hundreds of arrests, chasing down and cornering thieves and murderers, even though he weighed at most 50 pounds. Handsome was extremely territorial, and didn't even like cops from other stations.

[replace this with the image handsome.jpg]


He was only a dog, but his life was with the police. The complete biography of Handsome would make a book in itself. No officer in the history of the police department could perform his duties as simply as did Handsome. He made no reports; he prosecuted no cases, was never called on the carpet, never received any reprimands and never needed a uniform. 

During his 14 years as a police officer, Handsome assisted in hundreds of arrests. He plodded along several feet in front of policemen, with his head to the ground. On and on he plodded, hour after hour, day and night, year in and year out. He worked unceasingly. He would eat only when fed by a policeman in uniform. He slept only when the officers changed reliefs at roll call.

On one occasion, a murderer slipped through a police net. He had fled to the dives on the riverfront. The police squads closed in. Handsome did not like these outside police. They had no business on his beat, he thought. For a few minutes, Handsome left the strange police officers and went off by himself. It was not long until his partners heard the faint sound of Handsome's barking. They left the other officers and traced the barking sounds. Handsome was located in a dark hole under the main deck of a steamboat. He had his man at bay. The murderer pleaded with the officers to call off the dog. 

Then, one day, Handsome fell ill. He tried to go on, but he just could not. The best veterinarians in the city were called, but they could do nothing to help the dog. Their best efforts were in vain. Handsome was beyond aid. He died on his beat.




Handsome Today

[replace this with the image handsome-today.jpg]

When Handsome died in 1912, the police had him stuffed and placed in a glass case. Big Jim O'Neill was killed in the line of duty shortly afterward, and the station was eventually closed. Cincinnati, not wanting to throw out a perfectly good stuffed dog, moved Handsome into a tiny nature museum in an uptown park, where he made an odd display among fossils and Indian arrowheads. In the early 1970s Handsome was moved again, to the local Fraternal Order of Police hall, where he eventually ended up in a closet.

Happily, when the Cincinnati Police Historical Museum opened in 2006, Handsome was retrieved from storage, cleaned up, and once again put on public display, still in his original case.





Copyright Greater Cincinnati Police Historical Society and Patrick Olvey, GCPHS Historian.
